--- Page 1 ---
Lab 7
--- Page 2 ---
Entity-Relationship Model (ER Model)
The Entity-Relationship Model (ER Model) is a conceptual model for designing a database.
This model represents the logical structure of a database, including entities, their
attributes, and relationships between them.
Entity: An object that is stored as data. E.g: Student, Course, or Company.
Attribute: Properties that describe an entity. E.g: StudentID, CourseName, or
EmployeeEmail.
Relationship: A connection between entities. E.g: Student enrolls in a Course.
The graphical representation of this model is called an Entity-Relation Diagram (ERD).

--- Page 3 ---
ER Model in Database Design Process
We typically follow the below steps for designing a database for an application.
1.Gather the requirements (functional and data) by asking questions to the
database users.
2.Create a logical or conceptual design of the database. This is where ER
model platheys a role. It is the most used graphical representation of the
conceptual design of a database.
3.After this, focus on physical database design (like indexing) and external
design (like views).
Uses of ER Diagrams in DBMS
•ER diagrams represent the E-R model in a database, making them easy to
convert into relations (tables).
•These diagrams serve the purpose of real-world modeling of objects which
makes them intently useful.
•Unlike technical schemas, ER diagrams require no technical knowledge of the
underlying DBMS used.
•They visually model data and its relationships, making complex systems easier
to understand.

--- Page 4 ---
Symbols Used in ER Model
ER Model is used to model the
logical view of the system from
a data perspective which
consists of these symbols:

--- Page 5 ---
Entity
It represents a real-world object, concept or thing about which data is stored in a
database. It act as a building block of a database. Tables in relational database
represent these entities.
Example of entities:
•Real-World Objects: Person, Car, Employee etc.
•Concepts: Course, Event, Reservation etc.
•Things: Product, Document, Device etc.
The entity type defines the structure of an entity, while individual instances of that
type represent specific entities.
Entity Set
Refers to an individual object of an entity type, and the
collection of all entities of a particular type is called an
entity set. For example, E1 is an entity that belongs to the
entity type "Student," and the group of all students forms
the entity set.

--- Page 6 ---
Types of Entity
There are two main types of entities:
1. Strong Entity
A type of entity that has a key Attribute that can uniquely identify each instance of the
entity. A Strong Entity does not depend on any other Entity in the Schema for its
identification. It has a primary key that ensures its uniqueness and is represented by
a rectangle in an ER diagram.
2. Weak Entity
It cannot be uniquely identified by its own attributes alone. It depends on a strong
entity to be identified. A weak entity is associated with an identifying entity (strong
entity), which helps in its identification. A weak entity are represented by a double
rectangle. The participation of weak entity types is always total. The relationship
between the weak entity type and its identifying strong entity type is called identifying
relationship and it is represented by a double diamond.

--- Page 7 ---
Attributes in ER Model
Attributes are the properties that define the entity type. For example, for a Student
entity Roll_No, Name, DOB, Age, Address, and Mobile_No are the attributes that
define entity type Student. In ER diagram, the attribute is represented by an oval.
Types of Attributes
1. Key Attribute
The attribute which uniquely identifies each entity in the entity set is called the
key attribute. For example, Roll_No will be unique for each student. In ER
diagram, the key attribute is represented by an oval with an underline.

--- Page 8 ---
2. Composite Attribute
An attribute composed of many other attributes is called a composite attribute.
For example, the Address attribute of the student Entity type consists of Street,
City, State, and Country. In ER diagram, the composite attribute is represented
by an oval comprising of ovals.

--- Page 9 ---
3. Multivalued Attribute
An attribute consisting of more than one value for a given entity. For example,
Phone_No (can be more than one for a given student). In ER diagram, a
multivalued attribute is represented by a double oval.
4. Derived Attribute
An attribute that can be derived from other attributes of the entity type is known as
a derived attribute. e.g.; Age (can be derived from DOB). In ER diagram, the
derived attribute is represented by a dashed oval.

--- Page 10 ---
The Complete Entity Type Student with its Attributes can be represented as:

--- Page 11 ---
Relationship Type and Relationship Set
A Relationship Type represents the association between entity types. For example,
‘Enrolled in’ is a relationship type that exists between entity type Student and
Course. In ER diagram, the relationship type is represented by a diamond and
connecting the entities with lines.
A set of relationships of the same type is known as a relationship set. The following
relationship set depicts S1 as enrolled in C2, S2 as enrolled in C1, and S3 as
registered in C3.

--- Page 12 ---
Degree of a Relationship Set
The number of different entity sets participating in a relationship set is called
the degree of a relationship set.
.
1. Unary/Recursive Relationship: When there is only ONE entity set
participating in a relation. For example, one person is married to only one
person
2. Binary Relationship: When there are TWO entities set participating in a
relationship. For example, a Student is enrolled in a Course.

--- Page 13 ---
3. Ternary Relationship: When there are three entity sets participating in a
relationship.
4. N-ary Relationship: When there are n entities set participating in a
relationship, the relationship is called an n-ary relationship.

--- Page 14 ---
Cardinality in ER Model
The maximum number of times an entity of an entity set participates in a relationship
set is known as cardinality. Cardinality can be of different types:
1. One-to-One
When each entity in each entity set can take part only once in the relationship, the
cardinality is one-to-one. Let us assume that one person can be issued only one
passport, and one passport is issued to only one person. So, the relationship will
be One-to-One (1 : 1), meaning that each person has a single passport, and each
passport belongs to a single person.
Using Sets, it can be represented as:

--- Page 15 ---
2. One-to-Many
In a one-to-many relationship, one entity can be associated with multiple entities.
For example, a single Surgeon Department can have many Doctors. Therefore, the
cardinality of this relationship is 1 to M, meaning one department can have many
doctors.
Using sets, one-to-many cardinality can be represented as:

--- Page 16 ---
3. Many-to-One
When entities in one entity set can take part only once in the relationship set and
entities in other entity sets can take part more than once in the relationship set,
cardinality is many to one.
Let us assume that multiple surgeries can be performed by one surgeon, but one
surgery is performed by only one surgeon. So, the cardinality will be M to 1,
meaning that many surgeries can be done by a single surgeon, but each surgery is
done by only one surgeon.
Using Sets, it can be represented as:

--- Page 17 ---
4. Many-to-Many
When entities in all entity sets can take part more than once in the relationship
cardinality is many to many. Let us assume that an employee can work on multiple
projects and each project can have multiple employees working on it. So, the
relationship will be many-to-many (M:N), meaning that one employee may be
associated with several projects, and one project may involve several employees.
Using Sets, it can be represented as:

--- Page 18 ---
Participation Constraint
Participation Constraint is applied to the entity participating in the relationship set.
1.Total Participation: Each entity in the entity set must participate in the
relationship. If each student must enroll in a course, the participation of
students will be total. Total participation is shown by a double line in the ER
diagram.
2.Partial Participation: The entity in the entity set may or may NOT participate
in the relationship. If some courses are not enrolled by any of the students, the
participation in the course will be partial.
The diagram depicts the 'Enrolled in' relationship set with Student Entity set having
total participation and Course Entity set having partial participation.

--- Page 19 ---
Structural Constraints
Structural Constraints are also called Structural properties of a database
management system (DBMS). Cardinality Ratios and Participation Constraints
taken together are called Structural Constraints. The name constraints refer to the
fact that such limitations must be imposed on the data, for the DBMS system to be
consistent with the requirements.
The Structural constraints are represented by Min-Max notation. This is a pair of
numbers(m, n) that appear on the connecting line between the entities and their
relationships. The minimum number of times an entity can appear in a relation is
represented by m whereas, the maximum time it is available is denoted by n. If m
is 0 it signifies that the entity is participating in the relation partially, whereas, if m is
either greater than or equal to 1, it denotes total participation of the entity

--- Page 20 ---
Exercises
Problem 1:

--- Page 21 ---
Consider the ER diagram shown in the figure for part of a BANK database. Each bank can have
multiple branches, and each branch can have multiple accounts and loans.
a) List the nonweak entity types in the ER diagram.
b) Is there a weak entity type? If so, give its name, partial key, and identifying relationship
c) List the names of all relationship types, and specify the (min,max) constraint on each
participation of an entity type in a relationship type, justify your choices
d) Suppose that every customer must have at least one account but is restricted to at most
two loans at a time, and that a bank branch cannot have more than 1000 loans. How does
this show up on the (min, max) constraints?

--- Page 22 ---
Problem 2:
Consider the ER diagram in the figure.
Supply (min,max) constraints on this
diagram.
Assume that :
• An employee may work in upto two departments or may not be assigned to any
department.
• Each department must have one and may have up to three phone numbers
• Each department can have between 1 to 10 employees.
• Each phone is used by only one department.
• Each phone is assigned to at least one employee and maybe assigned to upto 5
employees.
• Each employee must have at least one phone and may have upto 3 phones.

--- Page 23 ---
Problem 3:
Consider the ER diagram in the figure. Assume that :
• A course may or may not use a textbook, but that a text by definition is a book tht
is used in some course.
• A course may not use more than five books.
• Instructors teach from two to four courses.
• Each course is taught by exactly one instructor.
• Each textbook is used by only one course.
• An instructor dose not have to adopt a textbook for all courses.
• If a text exists, (a) it is used in some course (b) it is adopted by a instructor who
teaches that course.
Supply (min,max) constraints on this
diagram. If we add the relationship
ADOPTS between INSTRUCTOR and
TEXT, what (min,max) constraints
would you put on it?why?

--- Page 24 ---
Problem 4:
Draw a complete ER diagram for University Management System , showing all entities,
attributes, relationships, and cardinalities. Indicate primary keys and any relationship
attributes.
 Each Department has a unique Department_ID, Name, and Office_Location.
 Each Department offers one or more Courses.
 Each Course has a unique Course_ID, Title, and Credits, and is offered by exactly
one Department.
 Each Instructor has a unique Instructor_ID, Name, Email, and Phone, and works for
exactly one Department.
 An Instructor can teach zero or more Courses, and each Course is taught by one or
more Instructors.
 Each Student has a unique Student_ID, Name, Address, and Date_of_Birth.
 A Student can enroll in zero or more Courses, and each Course can have zero or
more Students.
 For each Enrollment, store the Grade obtained by the student.

--- Page 25 ---
Student in Lab
Design a database for an emerging online bookstore. Based on interviews with the stakeholders, you have
gathered the following requirements. Your task is to draw an ER .
1. Books and Authors
Each Book is identified by a unique ISBN. We also need to track its Title, Price, and the Year it was
published.
An Author is recorded with a unique Name, an Address, and a URL (personal website).
Books are written-by authors. (Assume for this exercise that authors and books are connected in a way
that allows multiple authors per book).
2. Publishers
Each Publisher has a unique Name, an Address, a Phone number, and a URL.
A book is published-by exactly one publisher.
3. Inventory and Warehousing
Books are stored in various Warehouses. Each warehouse has a unique Code, an Address, and a Phone
number.
The relationship stocks connects books and warehouses. Crucially, we must keep track of the Number
(quantity) of a specific book held in a specific warehouse.
4. Customers and Shopping Baskets
A Customer is identified by a unique Email. We also store their Name, Address, and Phone number.
Each customer can have a Shopping-basket. A basket is identified by a basketID.
The relationship basket-of connects a customer to their specific basket.
A basket contains books. We need to record the Number (quantity) of each book added to the basket.

